<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>III: Hedonism</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Hedonism</p>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="chapter-3-36">
				<p><span epub:type="ordinal">36</span>. In this chapter we have to deal with what is perhaps the most famous and the most widely held of all ethical principles⁠—the principle that nothing is good but pleasure. My chief reason for treating of this principle in this place is, as I said, that Hedonism appears in the main to be a form of Naturalistic Ethics: in other words, that pleasure has been so generally held to be the sole good, is almost entirely due to the fact that it has seemed to be somehow involved in the <em>definition</em> of “good”⁠—to be pointed out by the very meaning of the word. If this is so, then the prevalence of Hedonism has been mainly due to what I have called the naturalistic fallacy⁠—the failure to distinguish clearly that unique and indefinable quality which we mean by good. And that it is so, we have very strong evidence in the fact that, of all hedonistic writers, <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Sidgwick alone has clearly recognised that by “good” we do mean something unanalysable, and has alone been led thereby to emphasise the fact that, if Hedonism be true, its claims to be so must be rested solely on its self-evidence⁠—that we must maintain “Pleasure is the sole good” to be a mere <em>intuition</em>. It appeared to <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Sidgwick as a new discovery that what he calls the “method” of Intuitionism must be retained as valid alongside of, and indeed as the foundation of, what he calls the alternative “methods” of Utilitarianism and Egoism. And that it was a new discovery can hardly be doubted. In previous Hedonists we find no clear and consistent recognition of the fact that their fundamental proposition involves the assumption that a certain unique predicate can be directly seen to belong to pleasure alone among existents: they do not emphasise, as they could hardly have failed to have done had they perceived it, how utterly independent of all other truths this truth must be.</p>
				<p>Moreover it is easy to see how this unique position should have been assigned to pleasure without any clear consciousness of the assumption involved. Hedonism is, for a sufficiently obvious reason, the first conclusion at which anyone who begins to reflect upon Ethics naturally arrives. It is very easy to notice the fact that we are pleased with things. The things we enjoy and the things we do not, form two unmistakable classes, to which our attention is constantly directed. But it is comparatively difficult to distinguish the fact that we <em>approve</em> a thing from the fact that we are pleased with it. Although, if we look at the two states of mind, we must see that they are different, even though they generally go together, it is very difficult to see in <em>what respect</em> they are different, or that the difference can in any connection be of more importance than the many other differences, which are so patent and yet so difficult to analyse, between one <em>kind</em> of enjoyment and another. It is very difficult to see that by “approving” of a thing we mean <em>feeling that it has a certain predicate</em>⁠—the predicate, namely, which defines the peculiar sphere of Ethics; whereas in the enjoyment of a thing no such unique object of thought is involved. Nothing is more natural than the vulgar mistake, which we find expressed in a recent book on Ethics:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-9" id="noteref-9" epub:type="noteref">9</a> “The primary ethical fact is, we have said, that something is approved or disapproved: that is, in other words, the ideal representation of certain events in the way of sensation, perception, or idea, is attended with a feeling of pleasure or of pain.” In ordinary speech, “I want this,” “I like this,” “I care about this” are constantly used as equivalents for “I think this good.” And in this way it is very natural to be led to suppose that there is no distinct class of ethical judgments, but only the class “things enjoyed”; in spite of the fact, which is very clear, if not very common, that we do not always approve what we enjoy. It is of course, very obvious that from the supposition that “I think this good” is identical with “I am pleased with this,” it cannot be <em>logically</em> inferred that pleasure alone is good. But, on the other hand, it is very difficult to see what could be logically inferred from such a supposition; and it seems <em>natural</em> enough that such an inference should suggest itself. A very little examination of what is commonly written on the subject will suffice to show that a logical confusion of this nature is very common. Moreover the very commission of the naturalistic fallacy involves that those who commit it should not recognise clearly the meaning of the proposition “This is good”⁠—that they should not be able to distinguish this from other propositions which seem to resemble it; and, where this is so, it is, of course, impossible that its logical relations should be clearly perceived.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-3-37">
				<p><span epub:type="ordinal">37</span>. There is, therefore, ample reason to suppose that Hedonism is in general a form of Naturalism⁠—that its acceptance is generally due to the naturalistic fallacy. It is, indeed, only when we have detected this fallacy, when we have become clearly aware of the unique object which is meant by “good,” that we are able to give to Hedonism the precise definition used above, “Nothing is good but pleasure”: and it may, therefore, be objected that, in attacking this doctrine under the name of Hedonism, I am attacking a doctrine which has never really been held. But it is very common to hold a doctrine, without being clearly aware what it is you hold; and though, when Hedonists argue in favour of what they call Hedonism, I admit that, in order to suppose their arguments valid, they must have before their minds something <em>other</em> than the doctrine I have defined, yet, in order to draw the conclusions that they draw, it is necessary that they should <em>also</em> have before their minds this doctrine. In fact, my justification for supposing that I shall have refuted <em>historical</em> Hedonism, if I refute the proposition “Nothing is good but pleasure,” is, that although Hedonists have rarely stated their principle in this form and though its truth, in this form, will certainly not follow from their arguments, yet their ethical <em>method</em> will follow logically from nothing else. Any pretence of the hedonistic method, to discover to us practical truths which we should not otherwise have known, is founded on the principle that the course of action which will bring the greatest balance of pleasure is certainly the right one; and, failing an absolute proof that the greatest balance of pleasure <em>always</em> coincides with the greatest balance of other goods, which it is not generally attempted to give, this principle can only be justified if pleasure be the sole good. Indeed it can hardly be doubted that Hedonists are distinguished by arguing, in disputed practical questions, <em>as if</em> pleasure were the sole good; and that it is justifiable, for this among other reasons, to take this as <em>the</em> ethical principle of Hedonism will, I hope, be made further evident by the whole discussion of this chapter.</p>
				<p>By Hedonism, then, I mean the doctrine that pleasure <em>alone</em> is good as an end⁠—“good” in the sense which I have tried to point out as indefinable. The doctrine that pleasure, <em>among other things</em>, is good as an end, is not Hedonism; and I shall not dispute its truth. Nor again is the doctrine that other things, beside pleasure, are good as means, at all inconsistent with Hedonism: the Hedonist is not bound to maintain that “Pleasure alone is good,” if under good he includes, as we generally do, what is good as means to an end, <em>as well as</em> the end itself. In attacking Hedonism, I am therefore simply and solely attacking the doctrine that “Pleasure <em>alone</em> is good as an end or in itself”: I am not attacking the doctrine that “Pleasure <em>is</em> good as an end or in itself,” nor am I attacking any doctrine whatever as to what are the best means we can take in order to obtain pleasure or any other end. Hedonists do, in general, recommend a course of conduct which is very similar to that which I should recommend. I do not quarrel with them about most of their practical conclusions, I quarrel only with the reasons by which they seem to think their conclusions can be supported; and I do emphatically deny that the correctness of their conclusions is any ground for inferring the correctness of their principles. A correct conclusion may always be obtained by fallacious reasoning; and the good life or virtuous maxims of a Hedonist afford absolutely no presumption that his ethical philosophy is also good. It is his ethical philosophy alone with which I am concerned: what I dispute is the excellence of his reasoning, not the excellence of his character as a man or even as moral teacher. It may be thought that my contention is unimportant, but that is no ground for thinking that I am not in the right. What I am concerned with is knowledge only⁠—that we should think correctly and so far arrive at some truth, however unimportant: I do not say that such knowledge will make us more useful members of society. If anyone does not care for knowledge for its own sake, then I have nothing to say to him; only it should not be thought that a lack of interest in what I have to say is any ground for holding it untrue.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-3-38">
				<p><span epub:type="ordinal">38</span>. Hedonists, then, hold that all other things but pleasure, whether conduct or virtue or knowledge, whether life or nature or beauty, are only good as means to pleasure or for the sake of pleasure, never for their own sakes or as ends in themselves. This view was held by Aristippus, the disciple of Socrates, and by the Cyrenaic school which he founded; it is associated with Epicurus and the Epicureans; and it has been held in modern times, chiefly by those philosophers who call themselves “Utilitarians”⁠—by Bentham, and by Mill, for instance. Herbert Spencer, as we have seen, also says he holds it; and Professor Sidgwick, as we shall see, holds it too.</p>
				<p>Yet all these philosophers, as has been said, differ from one another more or less, both as to what they mean by Hedonism, and as to the reasons for which it is to be accepted as a true doctrine. The matter is therefore obviously not quite so simple as it might at first appear. My own object will be to show quite clearly what the theory must imply, if it is made precise, if all confusions and inconsistencies are removed from the conception of it; and, when this is done, I think it will appear that all the various reasons given for holding it to be true, are really quite inadequate; that they are not reasons for holding Hedonism, but only for holding some other doctrine which is confused therewith. In order to attain this object I propose to take first Mill’s doctrine, as set forth in his book called <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Utilitarianism</i>: we shall find in Mill a conception of Hedonism, and arguments in its favour, which fairly represent those of a large class of hedonistic writers. To these representative conceptions and arguments grave objections, objections which appear to me to be conclusive, have been urged by Professor Sidgwick. These I shall try to give in my own words; and shall then proceed to consider and refute Professor Sidgwick’s own much more precise conceptions and arguments. With this, I think, we shall have traversed the whole field of Hedonistic doctrine. It will appear, from the discussion, that the task of deciding what is or is not good in itself is by no means an easy one; and in this way the discussion will afford a good example of the method which it is necessary to pursue in attempting to arrive at the truth with regard to this primary class of ethical principles. In particular it will appear that two principles of method must be constantly kept in mind: (1) that the naturalistic fallacy must not be committed; (2) that the distinction between means and ends must be observed.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-3-39">
				<p><span epub:type="ordinal">39</span>. I propose, then, to begin by an examination of Mill’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Utilitarianism</i>. That is a book which contains an admirably clear and fair discussion of many ethical principles and methods. Mill exposes not a few simple mistakes which are very likely to be made by those who approach ethical problems without much previous reflection. But what I am concerned with is the mistakes which Mill himself appears to have made, and these only so far as they concern the Hedonistic principle. Let me repeat what that principle is. It is, I said, that pleasure is the only thing at which we ought to aim, the only thing that is good as an end and for its own sake. And now let us turn to Mill and see whether he accepts this description of the question at issue. “Pleasure,” he says at the outset, “and freedom from pain, are the only things desirable as ends” (<abbr>p.</abbr> 10<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-10" id="noteref-10" epub:type="noteref">10</a>); and again, at the end of his argument, “To think of an object as desirable (unless for the sake of its consequences) and to think of it as pleasant are one and the same thing” (<abbr>p.</abbr> 58). These statements, taken together, and apart from certain confusions which are obvious in them, seem to imply the principle I have stated; and if I succeed in showing that Mill’s reasons for them do not prove them, it must at least be admitted that I have not been fighting with shadows or demolishing a man of straw.</p>
				<p>It will be observed that Mill adds “absence of pain” to “pleasure” in his first statement, though not in his second. There is, in this, a confusion, with which, however, we need not deal. I shall talk of “pleasure” alone, for the sake of conciseness; but all my arguments will apply <i xml:lang="la">a fortiori</i> to “absence of pain”: it is easy to make the necessary substitutions.</p>
				<p>Mill holds, then, that “happiness is desirable, and <em>the only thing desirable</em>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-11" id="noteref-11" epub:type="noteref">11</a> as an end; all other things being only desirable as means to that end” (<abbr>p.</abbr> 52). Happiness he has already defined as “pleasure, and the absence of pain” (<abbr>p.</abbr> 10); he does not pretend that this is more than an arbitrary verbal definition; and, as <em>such</em>, I have not a word to say against it. His principle, then, is “pleasure is the only thing desirable,” if I may be allowed, when I say “pleasure,” to include in that word (so far as necessary) absence of pain. And now what are his reasons for holding that principle to be true? He has already told us (<abbr>p.</abbr> 6) that “Questions of ultimate ends are not amenable to direct proof. Whatever can be proved to be good, must be so by being shown to be a means to something <em>admitted to be good without proof</em>.” With this, I perfectly agree: indeed the chief object of my first chapter was to show that this is so. Anything which is good as an end must be admitted to be good without proof. We are agreed so far. Mill even uses the same examples which I used in my second chapter. “How,” he says, “is it possible to prove that health is good?” “What proof is it possible to give that pleasure is good?” Well, in Chapter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, in which he deals with the proof of his Utilitarian principle, Mill repeats the above statement in these words: “It has already,” he says, “been remarked, that questions of ultimate ends do not admit of proof, in the ordinary acceptation of the term” (<abbr>p.</abbr> 52). “Questions about ends,” he goes on in this same passage, “are, in other words, questions what things are desirable.” I am quoting these repetitions, because they make it plain what otherwise might have been doubted, that Mill is using the words “desirable” or “desirable as an end” as absolutely and precisely equivalent to the words “good as an end.” We are, then, now to hear, what reasons he advances for this doctrine that pleasure alone is good as an end.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-3-40">
				<p><span epub:type="ordinal">40</span>. “Questions about ends,” he says (<abbr>pp.</abbr> 52⁠–⁠3), “are, in other words, questions what things are desirable. The utilitarian doctrine is, that happiness is desirable, and the only thing desirable, as an end; all other things being only desirable as means to that end. What ought to be required of this doctrine⁠—what conditions is it requisite that the doctrine should fulfil⁠—to make good its claim to be believed?</p>
				<p>“The only proof capable of being given that a thing is visible, is that people actually see it. The only proof that a sound is audible, is that people hear it; and so of the other sources of our experience. In like manner, I apprehend, the sole evidence it is possible to produce that anything is desirable, is that people do actually desire it. If the end which the utilitarian doctrine proposes to itself were not, in theory and in practice, acknowledged to be an end, nothing could ever convince any person that it was so. No reason can be given why the general happiness is desirable, except that each person, so far as he believes it to be attainable, desires his own happiness. This, however, being the fact, we have not only all the proof which the case admits of, but all which it is possible to require, that happiness is a good: that each person’s happiness is a good to that person, and the general happiness, therefore, a good to the aggregate of all persons. Happiness has made out its title as <em>one</em> of the ends of conduct, and consequently one of the criteria of morality.”</p>
				<p>There, that is enough. That is my first point. Mill has made as naive and artless a use of the naturalistic fallacy as anybody could desire. “Good,” he tells us, means “desirable,” and you can only find out what is desirable by seeking to find out what is actually desired. This is, of course, only one step towards the proof of Hedonism; for it may be, as Mill goes on to say, that other things beside pleasure are desired. Whether or not pleasure is the only thing desired is, as Mill himself admits (<abbr>p.</abbr> 58), a psychological question, to which we shall presently proceed. The important step for Ethics is this one just taken, the step which pretends to prove that “good” means “desired.” Well, the fallacy in this step is so obvious, that it is quite wonderful how Mill failed to see it. The fact is that “desirable” does not mean “able to be desired” as “visible” means “able to be seen.” The desirable means simply what <em>ought</em> to be desired or <em>deserves</em> to be desired; just as the detestable means not what can be but what ought to be detested and the damnable what deserves to be damned. Mill has, then, smuggled in, under cover of the word “desirable,” the very notion about which he ought to be quite clear. “Desirable” does indeed mean “what it is good to desire”; but when this is understood, it is no longer plausible to say that our only test of <em>that</em>, is what is actually desired. Is it merely a tautology when the Prayer Book talks of <em>good</em> desires? Are not <em>bad</em> desires also possible? Nay, we find Mill himself talking of a “better and nobler object of desire” (<abbr>p.</abbr> 10), as if, after all, what is desired were not ipso facto good, and good in proportion to the amount it is desired. Moreover, if the desired is ipso facto the good; then the good is ipso facto the motive of our actions, and there can be no question of finding motives for doing it, as Mill is at such pains to do. If Mill’s explanation of “desirable” be <em>true</em>, then his statement (<abbr>p.</abbr> 26) that the rule of action may be <em>confounded</em> with the motive of it is untrue: for the motive of action will then be according to him ipso facto its rule; there can be no distinction between the two, and therefore no confusion, and thus he has contradicted himself flatly. These are specimens of the contradictions, which, as I have tried to show, must always follow from the use of the naturalistic fallacy; and I hope I need now say no more about the matter.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-3-41">
				<p><span epub:type="ordinal">41</span>. Well, then, the first step by which Mill has attempted to establish his Hedonism is simply fallacious. He has attempted to establish the identity of the good with the desired, by confusing the proper sense of “desirable,” in which it denotes that which it is good to desire, with the sense which it would bear, if it were analogous to such words as “visible.” If “desirable” is to be identical with “good,” then it must bear one sense; and if it is to be identical with “desired,” then it must bear quite another sense. And yet to Mill’s contention that the desired is necessarily good, it is quite essential that these two senses of “desirable” should be the same. If he holds they are the same, then he has contradicted himself elsewhere; if he holds they are not the same, then the first step in his proof of Hedonism is absolutely worthless.</p>
				<p>But now we must deal with the second step. Having proved, as he thinks, that the good means the desired, Mill recognises that, if he is further to maintain that pleasure alone is good, he must prove that pleasure alone is really desired. This doctrine that “pleasure alone is the object of all our desires” is the doctrine which <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Sidgwick has called Psychological Hedonism: and it is a doctrine which most eminent psychologists are now agreed in rejecting. But it is a necessary step in the proof of any such Naturalistic Hedonism as Mill’s; and it is so commonly held, by people not expert either in psychology or in philosophy, that I wish to treat it at some length. It will be seen that Mill does not hold it in this bare form. He admits that other things than pleasure are desired; and this admission is at once a contradiction of his Hedonism. One of the shifts by which he seeks to evade this contradiction we shall afterwards consider. But some may think that no such shifts are needed: they may say of Mill, what Callicles says of Polus in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Gorgias</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-12" id="noteref-12" epub:type="noteref">12</a> that he has made this fatal admission through a most unworthy fear of appearing paradoxical; that they, on the other hand, will have the courage of their convictions, and will not be ashamed to go to any lengths of paradox, in defence of what they hold to be the truth.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-3-42">
				<p><span epub:type="ordinal">42</span>. Well, then, we are supposing it held that pleasure is the object of all desire, that it is the universal end of all human activity. Now I suppose it will not be denied that people are commonly said to desire other things: for instance, we usually talk of desiring food and drink, of desiring money, approbation, fame. The question, then, must be of what is meant by desire, and by the object of desire. There is obviously asserted some sort of necessary or universal relation between something which is called desire, and another thing which is called pleasure. The question is of what sort this relation is; whether in conjunction with the naturalistic fallacy above mentioned, it will justify Hedonism. Now I am not prepared to deny that there is some universal relation between pleasure and desire; but I hope to show, that, if there is, it is of such sort as will rather make against than for Hedonism. It is urged that pleasure is always the object of desire, and I am ready to admit that pleasure is always, in part at least, the <em>cause</em> of desire. But this distinction is very important. Both views might be expressed in the same language; both might be said to hold that whenever we desire, we always desire <em>because of</em> some pleasure: if I asked my supposed Hedonist, “Why do you desire that?” he might answer, quite consistently with his contention, “Because there is pleasure there,” and if he asked me the same question, I might answer, equally consistently with my contention, “Because there is pleasure here.” Only our two answers would not mean the same thing. It is this use of the same language to denote quite different facts, which I believe to be the chief cause why Psychological Hedonism is so often held, just as it was also the cause of Mill’s naturalistic fallacy.</p>
				<p>Let us try to analyse the psychological state which is called “desire.” That name is usually confined to a state of mind in which the idea of some object or event, not yet existing, is present to us. Suppose, for instance, I am desiring a glass of port wine. I have the idea of drinking such a glass before my mind, although I am not yet drinking it. Well, how does pleasure enter in to this relation? My theory is that it enters in, in this way. The <em>idea</em> of the drinking causes a feeling of pleasure in my mind, which helps to produce that state of incipient activity, which is called “desire.” It is, therefore, because of a pleasure, which I already have⁠—the pleasure excited by a mere idea⁠—that I desire the wine, which I have not. And I am ready to admit that a pleasure of this kind, an actual pleasure, is always among the causes of every desire, and not only of every desire, but of every mental activity, whether conscious or subconscious. I am ready to <em>admit</em> this, I say: I cannot vouch that it is the true psychological doctrine; but, at all events, it is not prima facie quite absurd. And now, what is the other doctrine, the doctrine which I am supposing held, and which is at all events essential to Mill’s argument? It is this. That when I desire the wine, it is not the wine which I desire but the pleasure which I expect to get from it. In other words, the doctrine is that the idea of a pleasure <em>not actual</em> is always necessary to cause desire; whereas my doctrine was that the <em>actual</em> pleasure caused by the idea of something else was always necessary to cause desire. It is these two different theories which I suppose the Psychological Hedonists to confuse: the confusion is, as <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bradley puts it,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-13" id="noteref-13" epub:type="noteref">13</a> between “a pleasant thought” and “the thought of a pleasure.” It is in fact only where the latter, the “thought of a pleasure,” is present, that pleasure can be said to be the <em>object</em> of desire, or the <em>motive</em> to action. On the other hand, when only a pleasant thought is present, as, I admit, <em>may</em> always be the case, then it is the object of the thought⁠—that which we are thinking about⁠—which is the object of desire and the motive to action; and the pleasure, which that thought excites, may, indeed, cause our desire or move us to action, but it is not our end or object nor our motive.</p>
				<p>Well, I hope this distinction is sufficiently clear. Now let us see how it bears upon Ethical Hedonism. I assume it to be perfectly obvious that the idea of the object of desire is not always and only the idea of a pleasure. In the first place, plainly, we are not always conscious of expecting pleasure, when we desire a thing. We may be only conscious of the thing which we desire, and may be impelled to make for it at once, without any calculation as to whether it will bring us pleasure or pain. And, in the second place, even when we do expect pleasure, it can certainly be very rarely pleasure <em>only</em> which we desire. For instance, granted that, when I desire my glass of port wine, I have also an idea of the pleasure I expect from it, plainly that pleasure cannot be the only object of my desire; the port wine must be included in my object, else I might be led by my desire to take wormwood instead of wine. If the desire were directed <em>solely</em> towards the pleasure, it could not lead me to take the wine; if it is to take a definite direction, it is absolutely necessary that the idea of the object, from which the pleasure is expected, should also be present and should control my activity. The theory then that what is desired is always and only pleasure must break down: it is impossible to prove that pleasure alone is good, by that line of argument. But, if we substitute for this theory, that other, possibly true, theory, that pleasure is always the cause of desire, then all the plausibility of our ethical doctrine that pleasure alone is good straightway disappears. For in this case, pleasure is not what I desire, it is not what I want: it is something which I already have, before I can want anything. And can anyone feel inclined to maintain, that that which I already have, while I am still desiring something else, is always and alone the good?</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-3-43">
				<p><span epub:type="ordinal">43</span>. But now let us return to consider another of Mill’s arguments for his position that “happiness is the sole end of human action.” Mill admits, as I have said, that pleasure is not the only thing we actually desire. “The desire of virtue,” he says, “is not as universal, but it is as authentic a fact, as the desire of happiness.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-14" id="noteref-14" epub:type="noteref">14</a> And again, “Money is, in many cases, desired in and for itself.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-15" id="noteref-15" epub:type="noteref">15</a> These admissions are, of course, in naked and glaring contradiction with his argument that pleasure is the only thing desirable, because it is the only thing desired. How then does Mill even attempt to avoid this contradiction? His chief argument seems to be that “virtue,” “money” and other such objects, when they are thus desired in and for themselves, are desired only as “a part of happiness.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-16" id="noteref-16" epub:type="noteref">16</a> Now what does this mean? Happiness, as we saw, has been defined by Mill, as “pleasure and the absence of pain.” Does Mill mean to say that “money,” these actual coins, which he admits to be desired in and for themselves, are a part either of pleasure or of the absence of pain? Will he maintain that those coins themselves are in my mind, and actually a part of my pleasant feelings? If this is to be said, all words are useless: nothing can possibly be distinguished from anything else; if these two things are not distinct, what on earth is? We shall hear next that this table is really and truly the same thing as this room; that a cab-horse is in fact indistinguishable from <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul’s Cathedral; that this book of Mill’s which I hold in my hand, because it was his pleasure to produce it, is now and at this moment a part of the happiness which he felt many years ago and which has so long ceased to be. Pray consider a moment what this contemptible nonsense really means. “Money,” says Mill, “is only desirable as a means to happiness.” Perhaps so; but what then? “Why,” says Mill, “money is undoubtedly desired for its own sake.” “Yes, go on,” say we. “Well,” says Mill, “if money is desired for its own sake, it must be desirable as an end-in-itself: I have said so myself.” “Oh,” say we, “but you also said just now that it was only desirable as a means.” “I own I did,” says Mill, “but I will try to patch up matters, by saying that what is only a means to an end, is the same thing as a part of that end. I daresay the public won’t notice.” And the public haven’t noticed. Yet this is certainly what Mill has done. He has broken down the distinction between means and ends, upon the precise observance of which his Hedonism rests. And he has been compelled to do this, because he has failed to distinguish “end” in the sense of what is desirable, from “end” in the sense of what is desired: a distinction which, nevertheless, both the present argument and his whole book presupposes. This is a consequence of the naturalistic fallacy.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-3-44">
				<p><span epub:type="ordinal">44</span>. Mill, then, has nothing better to say for himself than this. His two fundamental propositions are, in his own words, “that to think of an object as desirable (unless for the sake of its consequences), and to think of it as pleasant, are one and the same thing; and that to desire anything except in proportion as the idea of it is pleasant, is a physical and metaphysical impossibility.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-17" id="noteref-17" epub:type="noteref">17</a> Both of these statements are, we have seen, merely supported by fallacies. The first seems to rest on the naturalistic fallacy; the second rests partly on this, partly on the fallacy of confusing ends and means, and partly on the fallacy of confusing a pleasant thought with the thought of a pleasure. His very language shows this. For that the idea of a thing is pleasant, in his second clause, is obviously meant to be the same fact which he denotes by “thinking of it as pleasant,” in his first.</p>
				<p>Accordingly, Mill’s arguments for the proposition that pleasure is the sole good, and our refutation of those arguments, may be summed up as follows:</p>
				<p>First of all, he takes “the desirable,” which he uses as a synonym for “the good,” to <em>mean</em> what <em>can</em> be desired. The test, again, of what can be desired, is, according to him, what actually is desired: if, therefore, he says, we can find some one thing which is always and alone desired, that thing will necessarily be the only thing that is desirable, the only thing that is good as an end. In this argument the naturalistic fallacy is plainly involved. That fallacy, I explained, consists in the contention that good <em>means</em> nothing but some simple or complex notion, that can be defined in terms of natural qualities. In Mill’s case, good is thus supposed to <em>mean</em> simply what is desired; and what is desired is something which can thus be defined in natural terms. Mill tells us that we ought to desire something (an ethical proposition), because we actually do desire it; but if his contention that “I ought to desire” means nothing but “I do desire” were true, then he is only entitled to say, “We do desire so-and-so, because we do desire it”; and that is not an ethical proposition at all; it is a mere tautology. The whole object of Mill’s book is to help us to discover what we ought to do; but, in fact, by attempting to define the meaning of this “ought,” he has completely debarred himself from ever fulfilling that object: he has confined himself to telling us what we do do.</p>
				<p>Mill’s first argument then is that, because good means desired, therefore the desired is good; but having thus arrived at an ethical conclusion, by denying that any ethical conclusion is possible, he still needs another argument to make his conclusion a basis for Hedonism. He has to prove that we always do desire pleasure or freedom from pain, and that we never desire anything else whatever. This second doctrine, which Professor Sidgwick has called Psychological Hedonism, I accordingly discussed. I pointed out how obviously untrue it is that we never desire anything but pleasure; and how there is not a shadow of ground for saying even that, whenever we desire anything, we always desire pleasure <em>as well as</em> that thing. I attributed the obstinate belief in these untruths partly to a confusion between the cause of desire and the object of desire. It may, I said, be true that desire can never occur unless it be preceded by some <em>actual</em> pleasure; but even if this is true, it obviously gives no ground for saying that the object of desire is always some <em>future</em> pleasure. By the object of desire is meant that, of which the idea causes desire in us; it is some pleasure, which we anticipate, some pleasure which we have not got, which is the object of desire, whenever we do desire pleasure. And any actual pleasure, which may be excited by the idea of this anticipated pleasure, is obviously not the same pleasure as that anticipated pleasure, of which only the idea is actual. This actual pleasure is not what we want; what we want is always something which we have not got; and to say that pleasure always causes us to want is quite a different thing from saying that what we want is always pleasure.</p>
				<p>Finally, we saw, Mill admits all this. He insists that we do <em>actually</em> desire other things than pleasure, and yet he says we do <em>really</em> desire nothing else. He tries to explain away this contradiction, by confusing together two notions, which he has before carefully distinguished⁠—the notions of means and of end. He now says that a means to an end is the same thing as a part of that end. To this last fallacy special attention should be given, as our ultimate decision with regard to Hedonism will largely turn upon it.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-3-45">
				<p><span epub:type="ordinal">45</span>. It is this ultimate decision with regard to Hedonism at which we must now try to arrive. So far I have been only occupied with refuting Mill’s naturalistic arguments for Hedonism; but the doctrine that pleasure alone is desirable may still be true, although Mill’s fallacies cannot prove it so. This is the question which we have now to face. This proposition, “pleasure alone is good or desirable,” belongs undoubtedly to that class of propositions, to which Mill at first rightly pretended it belonged, the class of first principles, which are not amenable to direct proof. But in this case, as he also rightly says, “considerations may be presented capable of determining the intellect either to give or withhold its assent to the doctrine” (<abbr>p.</abbr> 7). It is such considerations that Professor Sidgwick presents, and such also that I shall try to present for the opposite view. This proposition that “pleasure alone is good as an end,” the fundamental proposition of Ethical Hedonism, will then appear, in Professor Sidgwick’s language, as an object of intuition. I shall try to show you why my intuition denies it, just as his intuition affirms it. It <em>may</em> always be true notwithstanding; neither intuition can <em>prove</em> whether it is true or not; I am bound to be satisfied, if I can “present considerations capable of determining the intellect” to reject it.</p>
				<p>Now it may be said that this is a very unsatisfactory state of things. It is indeed; but it is important to make a distinction between two different reasons, which may be given for calling it unsatisfactory. Is it unsatisfactory because our principle cannot be proved? or is it unsatisfactory merely because we do not agree with one another about it? I am inclined to think that the latter is the chief reason. For the mere fact that in certain cases proof is impossible does not usually give us the least uneasiness. For instance, nobody can prove that this is a chair beside me; yet I do not suppose that anyone is much dissatisfied for that reason. We all agree that it is a chair, and that is enough to content us, although it is quite possible we may be wrong. A madman, of course, might come in and say that it is not a chair but an elephant. We could not prove that he was wrong, and the fact that he did not agree with us might then begin to make us uneasy. Much more, then, shall we be uneasy, if someone, whom we do not think to be mad, disagrees with us. We shall try to argue with him, and we shall probably be content if we lead him to agree with us, although we shall not have proved our point. We can only persuade him by showing him that our view is consistent with something else which he holds to be true, whereas his original view is contradictory to it. But it will be impossible to prove that that something else, which we both agree to be true, is really so; we shall be satisfied to have settled the matter in dispute by means of it, merely because we are agreed on it. In short, our dissatisfaction in these cases is almost always of the type felt by the poor lunatic in the story. “I said the world was mad,” says he, “and the world said that I was mad; and, confound it, they outvoted me.” It is, I say, almost always such a disagreement, and not the impossibility of proof, which makes us call the state of things unsatisfactory. For, indeed, who can prove that proof itself is a warrant of truth? We are all agreed that the laws of logic are true and therefore we accept a result which is proved by their means; but such a proof is satisfactory to us only because we are all so fully agreed that it is a warrant of truth. And yet we cannot, by the nature of the case, prove that we are right in being so agreed.</p>
				<p>Accordingly, I do not think we need be much distressed by our admission that we cannot prove whether pleasure alone is good or not. We may be able to arrive at an agreement notwithstanding; and if so, I think it will be satisfactory. And yet I am not very sanguine about our prospects of such satisfaction. Ethics, and philosophy in general, have always been in a peculiarly unsatisfactory state. There has been no agreement about them, as there is about the existence of chairs and lights and benches. I should therefore be a fool if I hoped to settle one great point of controversy, now and once for all. It is extremely improbable I shall convince. It would be highly presumptuous even to hope that in the end, say two or three centuries hence, it will be agreed that pleasure is not the sole good. Philosophical questions are so difficult, the problems they raise are so complex, that no one can fairly expect, now, any more than in the past, to win more than a very limited assent. And yet I confess that the considerations which I am about to present appear to me to be absolutely convincing. I do think that they <em>ought</em> to convince, if only I can put them well. In any case, I can but try. I <em>shall</em> try now to put an end to that unsatisfactory state of things, of which I have been speaking. I shall try to produce an agreement that the fundamental principle of Hedonism is very like an absurdity, by showing what it must mean, if it is clearly thought out, and how that clear meaning is in conflict with other beliefs, which will, I hope, not be so easily given up.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-3-46">
				<p><span epub:type="ordinal">46</span>. Well, then, we now proceed to discuss Intuitionistic Hedonism. And the beginning of this discussion marks, it is to be observed, a turning-point in my ethical method. The point I have been labouring hitherto, the point that “good is indefinable,” and that to deny this involves a fallacy, is a point capable of strict proof: for to deny it involves contradictions. But now we are coming to the question, for the sake of answering which Ethics exists, the question what things or qualities are good. Of any answer to <em>this</em> question no direct proof is possible, and that, just because of our former answer, as to the meaning of good, direct proof <em>was</em> possible. We are now confined to the hope of what Mill calls “indirect proof,” the hope of determining one another’s intellect; and we are now so confined, just because, in the matter of the former question we are not so confined. Here, then, is an intuition to be submitted to our verdict⁠—the intuition that “pleasure alone is good as an end⁠—good in and for itself.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-3-47">
				<p><span epub:type="ordinal">47</span>. Well, in this connection it seems first desirable to touch on another doctrine of Mill’s⁠—another doctrine which, in the interest of Hedonism, Professor Sidgwick has done very wisely to reject. This is the doctrine of “difference of quality in pleasures.” “If I am asked,” says Mill,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-18" id="noteref-18" epub:type="noteref">18</a> “what I mean by difference of quality in pleasures, or what makes one pleasure more valuable than another, merely as a pleasure, except its being greater in amount, there is but one possible answer. Of two pleasures, if there be one to which all or almost all who have experience of both give a decided preference, irrespective of any feeling of moral obligation to prefer it, that is the more desirable pleasure. If one of the two is, by those who are competently acquainted with both, placed so far above the other that they prefer it, even though knowing it to be attended with a greater amount of discontent, and would not resign it for any quantity of the other pleasure which their nature is capable of, we are justified in ascribing to the preferred enjoyment a superiority in quality, so far outweighing quantity as to render it, in comparison, of small account.”</p>
				<p>Now it is well known that Bentham rested his case for Hedonism on “quantity of pleasure” alone. It was his maxim, that “quantity of pleasure being equal, pushpin is as good as poetry.” And Mill apparently considers Bentham to have proved that nevertheless poetry is better than pushpin; that poetry does produce a greater quantity of pleasure. But yet, says Mill, the Utilitarians “might have taken the other and, as it may be called, higher ground, with entire consistency” (<abbr>p.</abbr> 11). Now we see from this that Mill acknowledges “quality of pleasure” to be another or different ground for estimating pleasures, than Bentham’s quantity; and moreover, by that question-begging “higher,” which he afterwards translates into “superior,” he seems to betray an uncomfortable feeling, that, after all, if you take quantity of pleasure for your only standard, something may be wrong and you may deserve to be called a pig. And it may presently appear that you very likely would deserve that name. But, meanwhile, I only wish to show that Mill’s admissions as to quality of pleasure are either inconsistent with his Hedonism, or else afford no other ground for it than would be given by mere quantity of pleasure.</p>
				<p>It will be seen that Mill’s test for one pleasure’s superiority in quality over another is the preference of most people who have experienced both. A pleasure so preferred, he holds, is more desirable. But then, as we have seen, he holds that “to think of an object as desirable and to think of it as pleasant are one and the same thing” (<abbr>p.</abbr> 58). He holds, therefore, that the preference of experts merely proves that one pleasure is pleasanter than another. But if that is so, how can he distinguish this standard from the standard of quantity of pleasure? Can one pleasure be pleasanter than another, except in the sense that it gives <em>more</em> pleasure? “Pleasant” must, if words are to have any meaning at all, denote some one quality common to all the things that are pleasant; and, if so, then one thing can only be more pleasant than another, according as it has more or less of this one quality. But, then, let us try the other alternative, and suppose that Mill does not seriously mean that this preference of experts merely proves one pleasure to be pleasanter than another. Well, in this case what does “preferred” mean? It cannot mean “more desired,” since, as we know, the degree of desire is always, according to Mill, in exact proportion to the degree of pleasantness. But, in that case, the basis of Mill’s Hedonism collapses, for he is admitting that one thing may be preferred over another, and thus proved more desirable, although it is not more desired. In this case Mill’s judgment of preference is just a judgment of that intuitional kind which I have been contending to be necessary to establish the hedonistic or any other principle. It is a direct judgment that one thing is more desirable, or better than another; a judgment utterly independent of all considerations as to whether one thing is more desired or pleasanter than another. This is to admit that good is good and indefinable.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-3-48">
				<p id="chapter-3-48-p-1"><span epub:type="ordinal">48</span>. And note another point that is brought out by this discussion. Mill’s judgment of preference, so far from establishing the principle that pleasure alone is good, is obviously inconsistent with it. He admits that experts can judge whether one pleasure is more desirable than another, because pleasures differ in quality. But what does this mean? If one pleasure can differ from another in quality, that means, that <em>a</em> pleasure is something complex, something composed, in fact, of pleasure <em>in addition to</em> that which produces pleasure. For instance, Mill speaks of “sensual indulgences” as “lower pleasures.” But what is a sensual indulgence? It is surely a certain excitement of some sense <em>together with</em> the pleasure caused by such excitement. Mill, therefore, in admitting that a sensual indulgence can be directly judged to be lower than another pleasure, in which the degree of pleasure involved may be the same, is admitting that other things may be good, or bad, quite independently of the pleasure which accompanies them. <em>A</em> pleasure is, in fact, merely a misleading term which conceals the fact that what we are dealing with is not pleasure but something else, which may indeed necessarily produce pleasure, but is nevertheless quite distinct from it.</p>
				<p>Mill, therefore, in thinking that to estimate quality of pleasure is quite consistent with his hedonistic principle that pleasure and absence of pain alone are desirable as ends, has again committed the fallacy of confusing ends and means. For take even the most favourable supposition of his meaning; let us suppose that by a pleasure he does not mean, as his words imply, that which produces pleasure and the pleasure produced. Let us suppose him to mean that there are various kinds of pleasure, in the sense in which there are various kinds of colour⁠—blue, red, green, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> Even in this case, if we are to say that our end is colour alone, then, although it is impossible we should have colour without having some particular colour, yet the particular colour we must have, is only a <em>means</em> to our having colour, if colour is really our end. And if colour is our only possible end, as Mill says pleasure is, then there can be no possible reason for preferring one colour to another, red, for instance, to blue, except that the one is more of a colour than the other. Yet the opposite of this is what Mill is attempting to hold with regard to pleasures.</p>
				<p>Accordingly a consideration of Mill’s view that some pleasures are superior to others <em>in quality</em> brings out one point which may “help to determine the intellect” with regard to the intuition “Pleasure is the only good.” For it brings out the fact that if you say “pleasure,” you must mean “pleasure”: you must mean some one thing common to all different “pleasures,” some one thing, which may exist in different degrees, but which cannot differ in <em>kind</em>. I have pointed out that, if you say, as Mill does, that quality of pleasure is to be taken into account, then you are no longer holding that pleasure <em>alone</em> is good as an end, since you imply that something else, something which is <em>not</em> present in all pleasures, is <em>also</em> good as an end. The illustration I have given from colour expresses this point in its most acute form. It is plain that if you say “Colour alone is good as an end,” then you can give no possible reason for preferring one colour to another. Your only standard of good and bad will then be “colour”; and since red and blue both conform equally to this, the only standard, you can have no other whereby to judge whether red is better than blue. It is true that you cannot have colour unless you also have one or all of the particular colours: they, therefore, if colour is the end, will all be good as means, but none of them can be better than another even as a means, far less can any one of them be regarded as an end in itself. Just so with pleasure: If we do really mean “Pleasure alone is good as an end,” then we must agree with Bentham that “Quantity of pleasure being equal, pushpin is as good as poetry.” To have thus dismissed Mill’s reference to quality of pleasure, is therefore to have made one step in the desired direction. The reader will now no longer be prevented from agreeing with me, by any idea that the hedonistic principle “Pleasure alone is good as an end” is consistent with the view that one pleasure may be of a better quality than another. These two views, we have seen, are contradictory to one another. We must choose between them: and if we choose the latter, then we must give up the principle of Hedonism.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-3-49">
				<p><span epub:type="ordinal">49</span>. But, as I said, Professor Sidgwick has seen that they are inconsistent. He has seen that he must choose between them. He has chosen. He has rejected the test by quality of pleasure, and has accepted the hedonistic principle. He still maintains that “Pleasure alone is good as an end.” I propose therefore to discuss the considerations which he has offered in order to convince us. I shall hope by that discussion to remove some more of such prejudices and misunderstandings as might prevent agreement with me. If I can show that some of the considerations which Professor Sidgwick urges are such as we need by no means agree with, and that others are actually rather in my favour than in his, we may have again advanced a few steps nearer to the unanimity which we desire.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-3-50">
				<p id="chapter-3-50-p-1"><span epub:type="ordinal">50</span>. The passages in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Methods of Ethics</i> to which I shall now invite attention are to be found in <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>, 4 and in <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span>, 4⁠–⁠5.</p>
				<p>The first of these two passages runs as follows:</p>
				<p>“I think that if we consider carefully such permanent results as are commonly judged to be good, other than qualities of human beings, we can find nothing that, on reflection, appears to possess this quality of goodness out of relation to human existence, or at least to some consciousness or feeling.</p>
				<p>“For example, we commonly judge some inanimate objects, scenes, <abbr>etc.</abbr> to be good as possessing beauty, and others bad from ugliness: still no one would consider it rational to aim at the production of beauty in external nature, apart from any possible contemplation of it by human beings. In fact when beauty is maintained to be objective, it is not commonly meant that it exists as beauty out of relation to any mind whatsoever: but only that there is some standard of beauty valid for all minds.</p>
				<p>“It may, however, be said that beauty and other results commonly judged to be good, though we do not conceive them to exist out of relation to human beings (or at least minds of some kind), are yet so far separable as ends from the human beings on whom their existence depends, that their realization may conceivably come into competition with the perfection or happiness of these beings. Thus, though beautiful things cannot be thought worth producing except as possible objects of contemplation, still a man may devote himself to their production without any consideration of the persons who are to contemplate them. Similarly knowledge is a good which cannot exist except in minds; and yet one may be more interested in the development of knowledge than in its possession by any particular minds; and may take the former as an ultimate end without regarding the latter.</p>
				<p>“Still, as soon as the alternatives are clearly apprehended, it will, I think, be generally held that beauty, knowledge, and other ideal goods, as well as all external material things, are only reasonably to be sought by men in so far as they conduce (1) to Happiness or (2) to the Perfection or Excellence of human existence. I say ‘human,’ for though most utilitarians consider the pleasure (and freedom from pain) of the inferior animals to be included in the Happiness which they take as the right and proper end of conduct, no one seems to contend that we ought to aim at perfecting brutes except as a means to our ends, or at least as objects of scientific or aesthetic contemplation for us. Nor, again, can we include, as a practical end, the existence of beings above the human. We certainly apply the idea of Good to the Divine Existence, just as we do to His work, and indeed in a preeminent manner: and when it is said that, ‘we should do all things to the glory of God,’ it may seem to be implied that the existence of God is made better by our glorifying Him. Still this inference when explicitly drawn appears somewhat impious; and theologians generally recoil from it, and refrain from using the notion of a possible addition to the Goodness of the Divine Existence as a ground of human duty. Nor can the influence of our actions on other extra-human intelligences besides the Divine be at present made matter of scientific discussion.</p>
				<p>“I shall therefore confidently lay down, that if there be any Good other than Happiness to be sought by man, as an ultimate practical end, it can only be the Goodness, Perfection, or Excellence of Human Existence. How far this notion includes more than Virtue, what its precise relation to Pleasure is, and to what method we shall be logically led if we accept it as fundamental, are questions which we shall more conveniently discuss after the detailed examination of these two other notions, Pleasure and Virtue, in which we shall be engaged in the two following Books.”</p>
				<p>It will be observed that in this passage <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Sidgwick tries to limit the range of objects among which the ultimate end may be found. He does not yet say what that end is, but he does exclude from it everything but certain characters of Human Existence. And the possible ends, which he thus excludes, do not again come up for consideration. They are put out of court once for all by this passage and by this passage only. Now is this exclusion justified?</p>
				<p>I cannot think it is. “No one,” says <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Sidgwick, “would consider it rational to aim at the production of beauty in external nature, apart from any possible contemplation of it by human beings.” Well, I may say at once, that I, for one, do consider this rational; and let us see if I cannot get anyone to agree with me. Consider what this admission really means. It entitles us to put the following case. Let us imagine one world exceedingly beautiful. Imagine it as beautiful as you can; put into it whatever on this earth you most admire⁠—mountains, rivers, the sea; trees, and sunsets, stars and moon. Imagine these all combined in the most exquisite proportions, so that no one thing jars against another, but each contributes to increase the beauty of the whole. And then imagine the ugliest world you can possibly conceive. Imagine it simply one heap of filth, containing everything that is most disgusting to us, for whatever reason, and the whole, as far as may be, without one redeeming feature. Such a pair of worlds we are entitled to compare: they fall within <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Sidgwick’s meaning, and the comparison is highly relevant to it. The only thing we are not entitled to imagine is that any human being ever has or ever, by any possibility, <em>can</em>, live in either, can ever see and enjoy the beauty of the one or hate the foulness of the other. Well, even so, supposing them quite apart from any possible contemplation by human beings; still, is it irrational to hold that it is better that the beautiful world should exist, than the one which is ugly? Would it not be well, in any case, to do what we could to produce it rather than the other? Certainly I cannot help thinking that it would; and I hope that some may agree with me in this extreme instance. The instance is extreme. It is highly improbable, not to say, impossible, we should ever have such a choice before us. In any actual choice we should have to consider the possible effects of our action upon conscious beings, and among these possible effects there are always some, I think, which ought to be preferred to the existence of mere beauty. But this only means that in our present state, in which but a very small portion of the good is attainable, the pursuit of beauty for its own sake must always be postponed to the pursuit of some greater good, which is equally attainable. But it is enough for my purpose, if it be admitted that, <em>supposing</em> no greater good were at all attainable, then beauty must in itself be regarded as a greater good than ugliness; if it be admitted that, in that case, we should not be left without any reason for preferring one course of action to another, we should not be left without any duty whatever, but that it would then be our positive duty to make the world more beautiful, so far as we were able, since nothing better than beauty could then result from our efforts. If this be once admitted, if in any imaginable case you do admit that the existence of a more beautiful thing is better in itself than that of one more ugly, quite apart from its effects on any human feeling, then <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Sidgwick’s principle has broken down. Then we shall have to include in our ultimate end something beyond the limits of human existence. I admit, of course, that our beautiful world would be better still, if there were human beings in it to contemplate and enjoy its beauty. But that admission makes nothing against my point. If it be once admitted that the beautiful world <em>in itself</em> is better than the ugly, then it follows, that however many beings may enjoy it, and however much better their enjoyment may be than it is itself, yet its mere existence adds <em>something</em> to the goodness of the whole: it is not only a means to our end, but also itself a part thereof.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-3-51">
				<p><span epub:type="ordinal">51</span>. In the second passage to which I referred above, <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Sidgwick returns from the discussion of Virtue and Pleasure, with which he has meanwhile been engaged, to consider what among the parts of Human Existence to which, as we saw, he has limited the ultimate end, can really be considered as such end. What I have just said, of course, appears to me to destroy the force of this part of his argument too. If, as I think, other things than any part of Human Existence can be ends-in-themselves, then <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Sidgwick cannot claim to have discovered the Summum Bonum, when he has merely determined what parts of Human Existence are in themselves desirable. But this error may be admitted to be utterly insignificant in comparison with that which we are now about to discuss.</p>
				<p>“It may be said,” says <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Sidgwick (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span>, §§ <span epub:type="ordinal">4</span>⁠–⁠<span epub:type="ordinal">5</span>), “that we may⁠ ⁠… regard cognition of Truth, contemplation of Beauty, Free or Virtuous action, as in some measure preferable alternatives to Pleasure or Happiness⁠—even though we admit that Happiness must be included as a part of Ultimate Good.⁠ ⁠… I think, however, that this view ought not to commend itself to the sober judgment of reflective persons. In order to show this, I must ask the reader to use the same twofold procedure that I before requested him to employ in considering the absolute and independent validity of common moral precepts. I appeal firstly to his intuitive judgment after due consideration of the question when fairly placed before it: and secondly to a comprehensive comparison of the ordinary judgments of mankind. As regards the first argument, to me at least it seems clear after reflection that these objective relations of the conscious subject, when distinguished from the consciousness accompanying and resulting from them, are not ultimately and intrinsically desirable; any more than material or other objects are, when considered apart from any relation to conscious existence. Admitting that we have actual experience of such preferences as have just been described, of which the ultimate object is something that is not merely consciousness: it still seems to me that when (to use Butler’s phrase) we ‘sit down in a cool hour,’ we can only justify to ourselves the importance that we attach to any of these objects by considering its conduciveness, in one way or another, to the happiness of sentient beings.</p>
				<p>“The second argument, that refers to the common sense of mankind, obviously cannot be made completely cogent; since, as above stated, several cultivated persons do habitually judge that knowledge, art, <abbr>etc.</abbr>⁠—not to speak of Virtue⁠—are ends independently of the pleasure derived from them. But we may urge not only that all these elements of ‘ideal good’ are productive of pleasure in various ways; but also that they seem to obtain the commendation of Common Sense, roughly speaking, in proportion to the degree of this productiveness. This seems obviously true of Beauty; and will hardly be denied in respect of any kind of social ideal: it is paradoxical to maintain that any degree of Freedom, or any form of social order, would still be commonly regarded as desirable even if we were certain that it had no tendency to promote the general happiness. The case of Knowledge is rather more complex; but certainly Common Sense is most impressed with the value of knowledge, when its ‘fruitfulness’ has been demonstrated. It is, however, aware that experience has frequently shown how knowledge, long fruitless, may become unexpectedly fruitful, and how light may be shed on one part of the field of knowledge from another apparently remote: and even if any particular branch of scientific pursuit could be shown to be devoid of even this indirect utility, it would still deserve some respect on utilitarian grounds; both as furnishing to the inquirer the refined and innocent pleasures of curiosity, and because the intellectual disposition which it exhibits and sustains is likely on the whole to produce fruitful knowledge. Still in cases approximating to this last, Common Sense is somewhat disposed to complain of the misdirection of valuable effort; so that the meed of honour commonly paid to Science seems to be graduated, though perhaps unconsciously, by a tolerably exact utilitarian scale. Certainly the moment the legitimacy of any branch of scientific inquiry is seriously disputed, as in the recent case of vivisection, the controversy on both sides is generally conducted on an avowedly utilitarian basis.</p>
				<p>“The case of Virtue requires special consideration: since the encouragement in each other of virtuous impulses and dispositions is a main aim of men’s ordinary moral discourse; so that even to raise the question whether this encouragement can go too far has a paradoxical air. Still, our experience includes rare and exceptional cases in which the concentration of effort on the cultivation of virtue has seemed to have effects adverse to general happiness, through being intensified to the point of moral fanaticism, and so involving a neglect of other conditions of happiness. If, then, we admit as actual or possible such ‘infelicific’ effects of the cultivation of Virtue, I think we shall also generally admit that, in the case supposed, conduciveness to general happiness should be the criterion for deciding how far the cultivation of Virtue should be carried.”</p>
				<p>There we have <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Sidgwick’s argument completed. We ought not, he thinks, to aim at knowing the Truth, or at contemplating Beauty, except in so far as such knowledge or such contemplation contributes to increase the pleasure or to diminish the pain of sentient beings. Pleasure alone is good for its own sake: knowledge of the Truth is good only as a means to pleasure.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-3-52">
				<p><span epub:type="ordinal">52</span>. Let us consider what this means. What is pleasure? It is certainly something of which we may be conscious, and which, therefore, may be distinguished from our consciousness of it. What I wish first to ask is this: Can it really be said that we value pleasure, except in so far as we are conscious of it? Should we think that the attainment of pleasure, of which we never were and never could be conscious, was something to be aimed at for its own sake? It may be impossible that such pleasure should ever exist, that it should ever be thus divorced from consciousness; although there is certainly much reason to believe that it is not only possible but very common. But, even supposing that it were impossible, that is quite irrelevant. Our question is: Is it the pleasure, as distinct from the consciousness of it, that we set value on? Do we think the pleasure valuable in itself, or must we insist that, if we are to think the pleasure good, we must have consciousness of it too?</p>
				<p>This consideration is very well put by Socrates in Plato’s dialogue <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Philebus</i> (21 A).</p>
				<p>“Would <em>you</em> accept, Protarchus,” says Socrates, “to live your whole life in the enjoyment of the greatest pleasures?” “Of course I would,” says Protarchus.</p>
				<p><i>Socrates.</i> Then would you think you needed anything else besides, if you possessed this one blessing in completeness?</p>
				<p><i>Protarchus.</i> Certainly not.</p>
				<p><i>Socrates.</i> Consider what you are saying. You would not need to be wise and intelligent and reasonable, nor anything like this? Would you not even care to keep your sight?</p>
				<p><i>Protarchus.</i> Why should I? I suppose I should have all I want, if I was pleased.</p>
				<p><i>Socrates.</i> Well, then, supposing you lived so, you would enjoy always throughout your life the greatest pleasure?</p>
				<p><i>Protarchus.</i> Of course.</p>
				<p><i>Socrates.</i> But, on the other hand, inasmuch as you would <em>not</em> possess intelligence and memory and knowledge and true opinion, you would, in the first place, necessarily be without the knowledge whether you were pleased or not. For you would be devoid of any kind of wisdom. You admit this?</p>
				<p><i>Protarchus.</i> I do. The consequence is absolutely necessary.</p>
				<p><i>Socrates.</i> Well, then, besides this, not having memory, you must also be unable to remember even that you ever were pleased; of the pleasure which falls upon you at the moment not the least vestige must afterwards remain. And again, not having true opinion, you cannot think that you are pleased when you are; and, being bereft of your reasoning faculties, you cannot even have the power to reckon that you will be pleased in future. You must live the life of an oyster, or of some other of those living creatures, whose home is the seas and whose souls are concealed in shelly bodies. Is all this so, or can we think otherwise than this?</p>
				<p><i>Protarchus.</i> How can we?</p>
				<p><i>Socrates.</i> Well, then, can we think such a life desirable?</p>
				<p><i>Protarchus.</i> Socrates, your reasoning has left me utterly dumb.</p>
				<p>Socrates, we see, persuades Protarchus that Hedonism is absurd. If we are really going to maintain that pleasure alone is good as an end, we must maintain that it is good, whether we are conscious of it or not. We must declare it reasonable to take as our ideal (an unattainable ideal it may be) that we should be as happy as possible, even on condition that we never know and never can know that we are happy. We must be willing to sell in exchange for the mere happiness every vestige of knowledge, both in ourselves and in others, both of happiness itself and of every other thing. Can we really still disagree? Can anyone still declare it obvious that this is reasonable? That pleasure alone is good as an end?</p>
				<p>The case, it is plain, is just like that of the colours,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-19" id="noteref-19" epub:type="noteref">19</a> only, as yet, not nearly so strong. It is far more possible that we should some day be able to produce the intensest pleasure, without any consciousness that it is there, than that we should be able to produce mere colour, without its being any particular colour. Pleasure and consciousness can be far more easily distinguished from one another, than colour from the particular colours. And yet even if this were not so, we should be bound to distinguish them if we really wished to declare pleasure alone to be our ultimate end. Even if consciousness were an inseparable accompaniment of pleasure, a sine qua non of its existence, yet, if pleasure is the only end, we are bound to call consciousness a mere <em>means</em> to it, in any intelligible sense that can be given to the word <em>means</em>. And if, on the other hand, as I hope is now plain, the pleasure would be comparatively valueless without the consciousness, then we are bound to say that pleasure is <em>not</em> the only end, that some consciousness at least must be included with it as a veritable part of the end.</p>
				<p>For our question now is solely what the end is: it is quite another question how far that end may be attainable <em>by itself</em>, or must involve the simultaneous attainment of other things. It may well be that the <em>practical</em> conclusions at which Utilitarians do arrive, and even those at which they ought logically to arrive, are not far from the truth. But in so far as their <em>reason</em> for holding these conclusions to be true is that “Pleasure alone is good as an end,” they are <em>absolutely</em> wrong: and it is with <em>reasons</em> that we are chiefly concerned in any scientific Ethics.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-3-53">
				<p><span epub:type="ordinal">53</span>. It seems, then, clear that Hedonism is in error, so far as it maintains that pleasure alone, and not the consciousness of pleasure, is the sole good. And this error seems largely due to the fallacy which I pointed out above in Mill⁠—the fallacy of confusing means and end. It is falsely supposed that, since pleasure must always be accompanied by consciousness (which is, itself, extremely doubtful), therefore it is indifferent whether we say that pleasure or the consciousness of pleasure is the sole good. <em>Practically</em>, of course, it would be indifferent at which we aimed, if it were certain that we could not get the one without the other; but where the question is of what is good in itself⁠—where we ask: For the sake of what is it desirable to get that which we aim at?⁠—the distinction is by no means unimportant. Here we are placed before an exclusive alternative. <em>Either</em> pleasure by itself (even though we can’t get it) would be all that is desirable, <em>or</em> a consciousness of it would be more desirable still. Both these propositions cannot be true; and I think it is plain that the latter is true; whence it follows that pleasure is <em>not</em> the sole good.</p>
				<p>Still it may be said that, even if consciousness of pleasure, and not pleasure alone, is the sole good, this conclusion is not very damaging to Hedonism. It may be said that Hedonists have always meant by pleasure the consciousness of pleasure, though they have not been at pains to say so; and this, I think is, in the main, true. To correct their formula in this respect could, therefore, only be a matter of practical importance, if it is possible to produce pleasure without producing consciousness of it. But even this importance, which I think our conclusion so far really has, is, I admit, comparatively slight. What I wish to maintain is that even consciousness of pleasure is not the sole good: that, indeed, it is absurd so to regard it. And the chief importance of what has been said so far lies in the fact that the same method, which shows that consciousness of pleasure is more valuable than pleasure, seems also to show that consciousness of pleasure is itself far less valuable than other things. The supposition that consciousness of pleasure is the sole good is due to a neglect of the same distinctions which have encouraged the careless assertion that pleasure is the sole good.</p>
				<p>The method which I employed in order to show that pleasure itself was not the sole good, was that of considering what value we should attach to it, if it existed in absolute isolation, stripped of all its usual accompaniments. And this is, in fact, the only method that can be safely used, when we wish to discover what degree of value a thing has in itself. The necessity of employing this method will be best exhibited by a discussion of the arguments used by <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Sidgwick in the passage last quoted, and by an exposure of the manner in which they are calculated to mislead.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-3-54">
				<p><span epub:type="ordinal">54</span>. With regard to the second of them, it only maintains that other things, which might be supposed to share with pleasure the attribute of goodness, “seem to obtain the commendation of Common Sense, roughly speaking, in proportion to the degree” of their productiveness of pleasure. Whether even this rough proportion holds between the commendation of Common Sense and the felicific effects of that which it commends is a question extremely difficult to determine; and we need not enter into it here. For, even assuming it to be true, and assuming the judgments of Common Sense to be on the whole correct, what would it show? It would show, certainly, that pleasure was a good <em>criterion</em> of right action⁠—that the same conduct which produced most pleasure would also produce most good on the whole. But this would by no means entitle us to the conclusion that the greatest pleasure <em>constituted</em> what was best on the whole: it would still leave open the alternative that the greatest quantity of pleasure was as a matter of fact, <em>under actual conditions</em>, generally accompanied by the greatest quantity of <em>other goods</em>, and that it therefore was <em>not</em> the sole good. It might indeed seem to be a strange coincidence that these two things should always, even in this world, be in proportion to one another. But the strangeness of this coincidence will certainly not entitle us to argue directly that it does not exist⁠—that it is an illusion, due to the fact that pleasure is really the sole good. The coincidence may be susceptible of other explanations; and it would even be our duty to accept it unexplained, if direct intuition seemed to declare that pleasure was not the sole good. Moreover it must be remembered that the need for assuming such a coincidence rests in any case upon the extremely doubtful proposition that felicific effects <em>are</em> roughly in proportion to the approval of Common Sense. And it should be observed that, though <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Sidgwick maintains this to be the case, his detailed illustrations only tend to show the very different proposition that a thing is not held to be good, unless it gives a balance of pleasure; not that the degree of commendation is in proportion to the quantity of pleasure.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-3-55">
				<p id="chapter-3-55-p-1"><span epub:type="ordinal">55</span>. The decision, then, must rest upon <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Sidgwick’s first argument⁠—“the appeal” to our “intuitive judgment after due consideration of the question when fairly placed before it.” And here it seems to me plain that <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Sidgwick has failed, in two essential respects, to place the question fairly before either himself or his reader.</p>
				<p>(1) What he has to show is, as he says himself, not merely that “Happiness must be included as a part of Ultimate Good.” This view, he says, “ought not to commend itself to the sober judgment of reflective persons.” And why? Because “these objective relations, when distinguished from the consciousness accompanying and resulting from them, are not ultimately and intrinsically desirable.” Now, this reason, which is offered as showing that to consider Happiness as a mere part of Ultimate Good does not meet the facts of intuition, is, on the contrary, only sufficient to show that it <em>is</em> a part of Ultimate Good. For from the fact that no value resides in one part of a whole, considered by itself, we cannot infer that all the value belonging to the whole does reside in the other part, considered by itself. Even if we admit that there is much value in the enjoyment of Beauty, and none in the mere contemplation of it, which is one of the constituents of that complex fact, it does not follow that all the value belongs to the other constituent, namely, the pleasure which we take in contemplating it. It is quite possible that this constituent also has no value in itself; that the value belongs to the whole state, and to that only: so that <em>both</em> the pleasure <em>and</em> the contemplation are mere parts of the good, and both of them equally necessary parts. In short, <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Sidgwick’s argument here depends upon the neglect of that principle, which I tried to explain in my first chapter and which I said I should call the principle of “organic relations.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-20" id="noteref-20" epub:type="noteref">20</a> The argument is calculated to mislead, because it supposes that, if we see a whole state to be valuable, and also see that one element of that state has no value <em>by itself</em>, then the other element, <em>by itself</em>, must have all the value which belongs to the whole state. The fact is, on the contrary, that, since the whole may be organic, the other element need have no value whatever, and that even if it have some, the value of the whole may be very much greater. For this reason, as well as to avoid confusion between means and end, it is absolutely essential to consider each distinguishable quality, <em>in isolation</em>, in order to decide what value it possesses. <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Sidgwick, on the other hand, applies this method of isolation only to <em>one</em> element in the wholes he is considering. He does not ask the question: If consciousness of pleasure existed absolutely by itself, would a sober judgment be able to attribute much value to it? It is, in fact, always misleading to take a whole, that is valuable (or the reverse), and then to ask simply: To which of its constituents does this whole owe its value or its vileness? It may well be that it owes it to <em>none</em>; and, if one of them does appear to have some value in itself, we shall be led into the grave error of supposing that all the value of the whole belongs to it alone. It seems to me that this error has commonly been committed with regard to pleasure. Pleasure does seem to be a necessary constituent of most valuable wholes; and, since the other constituents, into which we may analyse them, may easily seem not to have any value, it is natural to suppose that all the value belongs to pleasure. That this natural supposition does not follow from the premises is certain; and that it is, on the contrary, ridiculously far from the truth appears evident to my “reflective judgment.” If we apply either to pleasure or to consciousness of pleasure the only safe method, that of isolation, and ask ourselves: Could we accept, as a very good thing, that mere consciousness of pleasure, and absolutely nothing else, should exist, even in the greatest quantities? I think we can have no doubt about answering: No. Far less can we accept this as the <em>sole</em> good. Even if we accept <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Sidgwick’s implication (which yet appears to me extremely doubtful) that consciousness of pleasure has a greater value by itself than Contemplation of Beauty, it seems to me that a pleasurable Contemplation of Beauty has certainly an immeasurably greater value than mere Consciousness of Pleasure. In favour of this conclusion I can appeal with confidence to the “sober judgment of reflective persons.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-3-56">
				<p><span epub:type="ordinal">56</span>. (2) That the value of a pleasurable whole does not belong solely to the pleasure which it contains, may, I think, be made still plainer by consideration of another point in which <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Sidgwick’s argument is defective. <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Sidgwick maintains, as we saw, the doubtful proposition, that the <em>conduciveness</em> to pleasure of a thing is in rough proportion to its commendation by Common Sense. But he does not maintain, what would be undoubtedly false, that the pleasantness of every state is in proportion to the commendation of that state. In other words, it is only when you take into account <em>the whole consequences of any state</em>, that he is able to maintain the coincidence of quantity of pleasure with the objects approved by Common Sense. If we consider each state by itself, and ask what is the judgment of Common Sense as to its goodness <em>as an end</em>, quite apart from its goodness as a means, there can be no doubt that Common Sense holds many much less pleasant states to be better than many far more pleasant: that it holds, with Mill, that there are higher pleasures, which are more valuable, though less pleasant, than those which are lower. <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Sidgwick might, of course, maintain that in this Common Sense is merely confusing means and ends: that what it holds to be better as an end, is in reality only better as a means. But I think his argument is defective in that he does not seem to see sufficiently plainly that, as far as intuitions of goodness <em>as an end</em> are concerned, he is running grossly counter to Common Sense; that he does not emphasise sufficiently the distinction between <em>immediate</em> pleasantness and <em>conduciveness</em> to pleasure. In order to place fairly before us the question what is good as an end we must take states that are immediately pleasant and ask if the more pleasant are always also the better; and whether, if some that are less pleasant appear to be so, it is only because we think they are likely to increase the number of the more pleasant. That Common Sense would deny both these suppositions, and rightly so, appears to me indubitable. It is commonly held that certain of what would be called the lowest forms of sexual enjoyment, for instance, are positively bad, although it is by no means clear that they are not the most pleasant states we ever experience. Common Sense would certainly not think it a sufficient justification for the pursuit of what <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Sidgwick calls the “refined pleasures” here and now, that they are the best means to the future attainment of a heaven, in which there would be no more refined pleasures⁠—no contemplation of beauty, no personal affections⁠—but in which the greatest possible pleasure would be obtained by a perpetual indulgence in bestiality. Yet <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Sidgwick would be bound to hold that, if the greatest possible pleasure could be obtained in this way, and if it were attainable, such a state of things would be a heaven indeed, and that all human endeavours should be devoted to its realisation. I venture to think that this view is as false as it is paradoxical.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-3-57">
				<p id="chapter-3-57-p-1"><span epub:type="ordinal">57</span>. It seems to me, then, that if we place fairly before us the question: Is consciousness of pleasure the sole good? the answer must be: No. And with this the last defence of Hedonism has been broken down. In order to put the question fairly we must isolate consciousness of pleasure. We must ask: Suppose we were conscious of pleasure only, and of nothing else, not even that we <em>were</em> conscious, would that state of things, however great the quantity, be very desirable? No one, I think, can suppose it so. On the other hand, it seems quite plain, that we do regard as very desirable, many complicated states of mind in which the consciousness of pleasure is combined with consciousness of other things⁠—states which we call “enjoyment of” so-and-so. If this is correct, then it follows that consciousness of pleasure is not the sole good, and that many other states, in which it is included as a part, are much better than it. Once we recognise the principle of organic unities, any objection to this conclusion, founded on the supposed fact that the other elements of such states have no value in themselves, must disappear. And I do not know that I need say any more in refutation of Hedonism.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-3-58">
				<p><span epub:type="ordinal">58</span>. It only remains to say something of the two forms in which a hedonistic doctrine is commonly held⁠—Egoism and Utilitarianism.</p>
				<p>Egoism, as a form of Hedonism, is the doctrine which holds that we ought each of us to pursue our own greatest happiness as our ultimate end. The doctrine will, of course, admit that sometimes the best means to this end will be to give pleasure to others; we shall, for instance, by so doing, procure for ourselves the pleasures of sympathy, of freedom from interference, and of self-esteem; and these pleasures, which we may procure by sometimes aiming directly at the happiness of other persons, may be greater than any we could otherwise get. Egoism in this sense must therefore be carefully distinguished from Egoism in another sense, the sense in which Altruism is its proper opposite. Egoism, as commonly opposed to Altruism, is apt to denote merely selfishness. In this sense, a man is an egoist, if all his actions are actually directed towards gaining pleasure for himself; whether he holds that he ought to act so, because he will thereby obtain for himself the greatest possible happiness on the whole, or not. Egoism may accordingly be used to denote the theory that we should always aim at getting pleasure for ourselves, because that is the best <em>means</em> to the ultimate end, whether the ultimate end be our own greatest pleasure or not. Altruism, on the other hand, may denote the theory that we ought always to aim at other people’s happiness, on the ground that this is the best <em>means</em> of securing our own as well as theirs. Accordingly an Egoist, in the sense in which I am now going to talk of Egoism, an Egoist, who holds that his own greatest happiness is the ultimate end, may at the same time be an Altruist: he may hold that he ought to “love his neighbour,” as the best means to being happy himself. And conversely an Egoist, in the other sense, may at the same time be a Utilitarian. He may hold that he ought always to direct his efforts towards getting pleasure for himself on the ground that he is thereby most likely to increase the general sum of happiness.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-3-59">
				<p id="chapter-3-59-p-1"><span epub:type="ordinal">59</span>. I shall say more later about this second kind of Egoism, this anti-altruistic Egoism, this Egoism as a doctrine of means. What I am now concerned with is that utterly distinct kind of Egoism, which holds that each man ought rationally to hold: My own greatest happiness is the only good thing there is; my actions can only be good as means, in so far as they help to win me this. This is a doctrine which is not much held by writers nowadays. It is a doctrine that was largely held by English Hedonists in the 17th and 18th centuries: it is, for example, at the bottom of Hobbes’ Ethics. But even the English school appear to have made one step forward in the present century: they are most of them nowadays Utilitarians. They do recognise that if my own happiness is good, it would be strange that other people’s happiness should not be good too.</p>
				<p>In order fully to expose the absurdity of this kind of Egoism, it is necessary to examine certain confusions upon which its plausibility depends.</p>
				<p>The chief of these is the confusion involved in the conception of “my own good” as distinguished from “the good of others.” This is a conception which we all use every day; it is one of the first to which the plain man is apt to appeal in discussing any question of Ethics: and Egoism is commonly advocated chiefly because its meaning is not clearly perceived. It is plain, indeed, that the name “Egoism” more properly applies to the theory that “my own good” is the sole good, than that my own pleasure is so. A man may quite well be an Egoist, even if he be not a Hedonist. The conception which is, perhaps, most closely associated with Egoism is that denoted by the words “my own interest.” The Egoist is the man who holds that a tendency to promote his own interest is the sole possible, and sufficient, justification of all his actions. But this conception of “my own interest” plainly includes, in general, very much more than my own pleasure. It is, indeed, only because and in so far as “my own interest” has been thought to consist solely in my own pleasure, that Egoists have been led to hold that my own pleasure is the sole good. Their course of reasoning is as follows: The only thing I ought to secure is my own interest; but my own interest consists in my greatest possible pleasure; and therefore the only thing I ought to pursue is my own pleasure. That it is very natural, <em>on reflection</em>, thus to identify my own pleasure with my own interest; and that it has been generally done by modern <em>moralists</em>, may be admitted. But, when <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Sidgwick points this out (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span>, § <span epub:type="ordinal">5</span>, <abbr>Div.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>), he should have also pointed out that this identification has by no means been made in ordinary thought. When the plain man says “my own interest,” he does <em>not</em> mean “my own pleasure”⁠—he does not commonly even include this⁠—he means my own advancement, my own reputation, the getting of a better income <abbr>etc.</abbr>, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> That <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Sidgwick should not have noticed this, and that he should give the reason he gives for the fact that the ancient <em>moralists</em> did not identify “my own interest” with my own pleasure, seems to be due to his having failed to notice that very confusion in the conception of “my own good” which I am now to point out. That confusion has, perhaps, been more clearly perceived by Plato than by any other moralist, and to point it out suffices to refute <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Sidgwick’s own view that Egoism is rational.</p>
				<p>What, then, is meant by “my own good”? In what sense can a thing be good <em>for me</em>? It is obvious, if we reflect, that the only thing which can belong to me, which can be <em>mine</em>, is something which is good, and not the fact that it is good. When, therefore, I talk of anything I get as “my own good,” I must mean either that the thing I get is good, or that my possessing it is good. In both cases it is only the thing or the possession of it which is <em>mine</em>, and not <em>the goodness</em> of that thing or that possession. There is no longer any meaning in attaching the “my” to our predicate, and saying: The possession of this <em>by me</em> is <em>my</em> good. Even if we interpret this by “My possession of this is what <em>I</em> think good,” the same still holds: for <em>what</em> I think is that my possession of it is good <em>simply</em>; and, if I think rightly, then the truth is that my possession of it <em>is</em> good simply⁠—not, in any sense, <em>my</em> good; and, if I think wrongly, it is not good at all. In short, when I talk of a thing as “my own good” all that I can mean is that something which will be exclusively mine, as my own pleasure is mine (whatever be the various senses of this relation denoted by “possession”), is also <em>good absolutely</em>; or rather that my possession of it is <em>good absolutely</em>. The <em>good</em> of it can in no possible sense be “private” or belong to me; any more than a thing can <em>exist</em> privately or <em>for</em> one person only. The only reason I can have for aiming at “my own good,” is that it is <em>good absolutely</em> that what I so call should belong to me⁠—<em>good absolutely</em> that I should <em>have</em> something, which, if I have it, others cannot have. But if it is <em>good absolutely</em> that I should have it, then everyone else has as much reason for aiming at <em>my</em> having it, as I have myself. If, therefore, it is true of <em>any</em> single man’s “interest” or “happiness” that it ought to be his sole ultimate end, this can only mean that <em>that</em> man’s “interest” or “happiness” is <em>the sole good, the</em> Universal Good, and the only thing that anybody ought to aim at. What Egoism holds, therefore, is that <em>each</em> man’s happiness is the sole good⁠—that a number of different things are <em>each</em> of them the only good thing there is⁠—an absolute contradiction! No more complete and thorough refutation of any theory could be desired.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-3-60">
				<p><span epub:type="ordinal">60</span>. Yet <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Sidgwick holds that Egoism is rational; and it will be useful briefly to consider the reasons which he gives for this absurd conclusion. “The Egoist,” he says (last <abbr>Chap.</abbr> § <span epub:type="ordinal">1</span>), “may avoid the proof of Utilitarianism by declining to affirm,” either “implicitly or explicitly, that his own greatest happiness is not merely the ultimate rational end for himself, but a part of Universal Good.” And in the passage to which he here refers us, as having there “seen” this, he says: “It cannot be proved that the difference between his own happiness and another’s happiness is not <em>for him</em> all-important” (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, § <span epub:type="ordinal">1</span>). What does <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Sidgwick mean by these phrases “the ultimate rational end for himself,” and “<em>for him</em> all-important”? He does not attempt to define them; and it is largely the use of such undefined phrases which causes absurdities to be committed in philosophy.</p>
				<p>Is there any sense in which a thing can be an ultimate rational end for one person and not for another? By “ultimate” must be meant at least that the end is good-in-itself⁠—good in our undefinable sense; and by “rational,” at least, that it is truly good. That a thing should be an ultimate rational end means, then, that it is truly good in itself; and that it is truly good in itself means that it is a part of Universal Good. Can we assign any meaning to that qualification “for himself,” which will make it cease to be a part of Universal Good? The thing is impossible: for the Egoist’s happiness must <em>either</em> be good in itself, and so a part of Universal Good, <em>or else</em> it cannot be good in itself at all: there is no escaping this dilemma. And if it is not good at all, what reason can he have for aiming at it? how can it be a rational end for him? That qualification “for himself” has no meaning unless it implies “<em>not</em> for others”; and if it implies “not for others,” then it cannot be a rational end for him, since it cannot be truly good in itself: the phrase “an ultimate rational end for himself” is a contradiction in terms. By saying that a thing is an end for one particular person, or good for him, can only be meant one of four things. Either (1) it may be meant that the end in question is something which will belong exclusively to him; but in that case, if it is to be rational for him to aim at it, that he should exclusively possess it must be a part of Universal Good. Or (2) it may be meant that it is the only thing at which he ought to aim; but this can only be, because, by so doing, he will do the most he can towards realising Universal Good: and this, in our case, will only give Egoism as a doctrine of <em>means</em>. Or (3) it may be meant that the thing is what he desires or thinks good; and then, if he thinks wrongly, it is not a rational end at all, and, if he thinks rightly, it is a part of Universal Good. Or (4) it may be meant that it is peculiarly appropriate that a thing which will belong exclusively to him should also by him be approved or aimed at; but, in this case, both that it should belong to him and that he should aim at it must be parts of Universal Good: by saying that a certain relation between two things is fitting or appropriate, we can only mean that the existence of that relation is absolutely good in itself (unless it be so as a means, which gives case (2)). By no possible meaning, then, that can be given to the phrase that his own happiness is the ultimate rational end for himself can the Egoist escape the implication that his own happiness is absolutely good; and by saying that it is <em>the</em> ultimate rational end, he must mean that it is the only good thing⁠—the whole of Universal Good: and, if he further maintains, that each man’s happiness is the ultimate rational end for <em>him</em>, we have the fundamental contradiction of Egoism⁠—that an immense number of different things are, <em>each</em> of them, <em>the sole good</em>.⁠—And it is easy to see that the same considerations apply to the phrase that “the difference between his own happiness and another’s is <em>for him</em> all-important.” This can only mean either (1) that his own happiness is the only end which will affect him, or (2) that the only important thing for him (as a means) is to look to his own happiness, or (3) that it is only his own happiness which he cares about, or (4) that it is good that each man’s happiness should be the only concern of that man. And none of these propositions, true as they may be, have the smallest tendency to show that if his own happiness is desirable at all, it is not a part of Universal Good. Either his own happiness is a good thing or it is not; and, in whatever sense it may be all-important for him, it must be true that, if it is not good, he is not justified in pursuing it, and that, if it is good, everyone else has an equal reason to pursue it, so far as they are able and so far as it does not exclude their attainment of other more valuable parts of Universal Good. In short it is plain that the addition of “for him,” “for me” to such words as “ultimate rational end,” “good,” “important” can introduce nothing but confusion. The only possible reason that can justify any action is that by it the greatest possible amount of what is good absolutely should be realised. And if anyone says that the attainment of his own happiness justifies his actions, he must mean that this is the greatest possible amount of Universal Good which he can realise. And this again can only be true either because <em>he</em> has no power to realise more, in which case he only holds Egoism as a doctrine of means; or else because his own happiness is the greatest amount of Universal Good which can be realised at all, in which case we have Egoism proper, and the flagrant contradiction that every person’s happiness is singly the greatest amount of Universal Good which can be realised at all.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-3-61">
				<p><span epub:type="ordinal">61</span>. It should be observed that, since this is so, “the relation of Rational Egoism to Rational Benevolence,” which <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Sidgwick regards “as the profoundest problem of Ethics” (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</span>, § <span epub:type="ordinal">5</span>, <abbr>n.</abbr> 1), appears in quite a different light to that in which he presents it. “Even if a man,” he says, “admits the self-evidence of the principle of Rational Benevolence, he may still hold that his own happiness is an end which it is irrational for him to sacrifice to any other; and that therefore a harmony between the maxim of Prudence and the maxim of Rational Benevolence must be somehow demonstrated, if morality is to be made completely rational. This latter view is that which I myself hold” (last <abbr>Chap.</abbr> § <span epub:type="ordinal">1</span>). <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Sidgwick then goes on to show “that the inseparable connection between Utilitarian Duty and the greatest happiness of the individual who conforms to it cannot be satisfactorily demonstrated on empirical grounds” (<abbr>Ib.</abbr> § <span epub:type="ordinal">3</span>). And the final paragraph of his book tells us that, since “the reconciliation of duty and self-interest is to be regarded as a hypothesis logically necessary to avoid a fundamental <em>contradiction</em> in one chief department of our thought, it remains to ask how far this necessity constitutes a sufficient reason for accepting this hypothesis”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-21" id="noteref-21" epub:type="noteref">21</a> (<abbr>Ib.</abbr> § <span epub:type="ordinal">5</span>). To “assume the existence of such a Being, as God, by the <em>consensus</em> of theologians, is conceived to be” would, he has already argued, ensure the required reconciliation; since the Divine Sanctions of such a God “would, of course, suffice to make it always everyone’s interest to promote universal happiness to the best of his knowledge” (<abbr>Ib.</abbr> § <span epub:type="ordinal">5</span>).</p>
				<p>Now what is this “reconciliation of duty and self-interest,” which Divine Sanctions could ensure? It would consist in the mere fact that the same conduct which produced the greatest possible happiness of the greatest number would always also produce the greatest possible happiness of the agent. If this were the case (and our empirical knowledge shows that it is not the case in this world), “morality” would, <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Sidgwick thinks, be “completely rational”: we should avoid “an ultimate and fundamental contradiction in our apparent intuitions of what is Reasonable in conduct.” That is to say, we should avoid the necessity of thinking that it is as manifest an obligation to secure our own greatest Happiness (maxim of Prudence), as to secure the greatest Happiness on the whole (maxim of Benevolence). But it is perfectly obvious we should not. <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Sidgwick here commits the characteristic fallacy of Empiricism⁠—the fallacy of thinking that an alteration in <em>facts</em> could make a contradiction cease to be a contradiction. That a single man’s happiness should be <em>the sole good</em>, and that also everybody’s happiness should be <em>the sole good</em>, is a contradiction which cannot be solved by the assumption that the same conduct will secure both: it would be equally contradictory, however certain we were that that assumption was justified. <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Sidgwick strains at a gnat and swallows a camel. He thinks the Divine Omnipotence must be called into play to secure that what gives other people pleasure should also give it to him⁠—that only so can Ethics be made rational; while he overlooks the fact that even this exercise of Divine Omnipotence would leave in Ethics a contradiction, in comparison with which his difficulty is a trifle⁠—a contradiction, which would reduce all Ethics to mere nonsense, and before which the Divine Omnipotence must be powerless to all eternity. That <em>each</em> man’s happiness should be the <em>sole good</em>, which we have seen to be the principle of Egoism, is in itself a contradiction: and that it should also be true that the Happiness of all is the <em>sole good</em>, which is the principle of Universalistic Hedonism, would introduce another contradiction. And that these propositions should all be true might well be called “the profoundest problem in Ethics”: it would be a problem necessarily insoluble. But they <em>cannot</em> all be true, and there is no reason, but confusion, for the supposition that they are. <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Sidgwick confuses this contradiction with the mere fact (in which there is no contradiction) that our own greatest happiness and that of all do not seem always attainable by the same means. This fact, if Happiness were the sole good, would indeed be of some importance; and, on any view, similar facts are of importance. But they are nothing but instances of the one important fact that in this world the quantity of good which is attainable is ridiculously small compared to that which is imaginable. That I cannot get the most possible pleasure for myself, if I produce the most possible pleasure on the whole, is no more <em>the</em> profoundest problem of Ethics, than that in any case I cannot get as much pleasure altogether as would be desirable. It only states that, if we get as much good as possible in one place, we may get less on the whole, because the quantity of attainable good is limited. To say that I have to choose between my own good and that of <em>all</em> is a false antithesis: the only rational question is how to choose between my own and that of <em>others</em>, and the principle on which this must be answered is exactly the same as that on which I must choose whether to give pleasure to this other person or to that.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-3-62">
				<p><span epub:type="ordinal">62</span>. It is plain, then, that the doctrine of Egoism is self-contradictory; and that one reason why this is not perceived, is a confusion with regard to the meaning of the phrase “my own good.” And it may be observed that this confusion and the neglect of this contradiction are necessarily involved in the transition from Naturalistic Hedonism, as ordinarily held, to Utilitarianism. Mill, for instance, as we saw, declares: “Each person, so far as he believes it to be attainable, desires his own happiness” (<abbr>p.</abbr> 53). And he offers this as a reason why the general happiness is desirable. We have seen that to regard it as such, involves, in the first place, the naturalistic fallacy. But moreover, even if that fallacy were not a fallacy, it could only be a reason for Egoism and not for Utilitarianism. Mill’s argument is as follows: A man desires his own happiness; therefore his own happiness is desirable. Further: A man desires nothing but his own happiness; therefore his own happiness is alone desirable. We have next to remember, that everybody, according to Mill, so desires his own happiness: and then it will follow that everybody’s happiness is alone desirable. And this is simply a contradiction in terms. Just consider what it means. Each man’s happiness is the only thing desirable: several different things are <em>each</em> of them the <em>only</em> thing desirable. This is the fundamental contradiction of Egoism. In order to think that what his arguments tend to prove is not Egoism but Utilitarianism, Mill must think that he can infer from the proposition “Each man’s happiness is his own good,” the proposition “The happiness of all is the good of all”; whereas in fact, if we understand what “his own good” means, it is plain that the latter can only be inferred from “The happiness of all is the good of each.” Naturalistic Hedonism, then, logically leads only to Egoism. Of course, a Naturalist might hold that what we aimed at was simply “pleasure” not our own pleasure; and <em>that</em>, always assuming the naturalistic fallacy, would give an unobjectionable ground for Utilitarianism. But more commonly he will hold that it is his own pleasure he desires, or at least will confuse this with the other; and then he must logically be led to adopt Egoism and not Utilitarianism.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-3-63">
				<p><span epub:type="ordinal">63</span>. The second cause I have to give why Egoism should be thought reasonable, is simply its confusion with that other kind of Egoism⁠—Egoism as a doctrine of means. This second Egoism has a right to say: You ought to pursue your own happiness, sometimes at all events; it may even say: Always. And when we find it saying this we are apt to forget its proviso: But only as a means to something else. The fact is we are in an imperfect state; we cannot get the ideal all at once. And hence it is often our bounden duty, we often <em>absolutely</em> “<em>ought</em>,” to do things which are good only or chiefly as means: we have to do the best we can, what is absolutely “right,” but not what is absolutely good. Of this I shall say more hereafter. I only mention it here because I think it is much more plausible to say that we ought to pursue our own pleasure as a means than as an end, and that this doctrine, through confusion, lends some of its plausibility to the utterly different doctrine of Egoism proper: My own greatest pleasure is the only good thing.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-3-64">
				<p><span epub:type="ordinal">64</span>. So much for Egoism. Of Utilitarianism not much need be said; but two points may seem deserving of notice.</p>
				<p>The first is that this name, like that of Egoism, does not naturally suggest that all our actions are to be judged according to the degree in which they are a means to <em>pleasure</em>. Its natural meaning is that the standard of right and wrong in conduct is its tendency to promote the <em>interest</em> of everybody. And by <em>interest</em> is commonly meant a variety of different goods, classed together only because they are what a man commonly desires for himself, so far as his desires have not that psychological quality which is meant by “moral.” The “useful” thus means, and was in ancient Ethics systematically used to mean, what is a means to the attainment of goods other than moral goods. It is quite an unjustifiable assumption that these goods are only good as means to pleasure or that they are commonly so regarded. The chief reason for adopting the name “Utilitarianism” was, indeed, merely to emphasize the fact that right and wrong conduct must be judged by its results⁠—as a means, in opposition to the strictly Intuitionistic view that certain ways of acting were right and others wrong, whatever their results might be. In thus insisting that what is right must mean what produces the best possible results Utilitarianism is fully justified. But with this correct contention there has been historically, and very naturally, associated a double error. (1) The best possible results were assumed to consist only in a limited class of goods, roughly coinciding with those which were popularly distinguished as the results of merely “useful” or “interested” actions; and these again were hastily assumed to be good only as means to pleasure. (2) The Utilitarians tend to regard everything as a mere means, neglecting the fact that some things which are good as means are also good as ends. Thus, for instance, assuming pleasure to be a good, there is a tendency to value present pleasure only as a means to future pleasure, and not, as is strictly necessary if pleasure is good as an end, also to <em>weigh it against</em> possible future pleasures. Much utilitarian argument involves the logical absurdity that what is here and now, never has any value in itself, but is only to be judged by its consequences; which again, of course, when they are realised, would have no value in themselves, but would be mere means to a still further future, and so on <i xml:lang="la">ad infinitum</i>.</p>
				<p>The second point deserving notice with regard to Utilitarianism is that, when the name is used for a form of Hedonism, it does not commonly, even in its description of its <em>end</em>, accurately distinguish between means and end. Its best-known formula is that the result by which actions are to be judged is “the greatest happiness of the greatest number.” But it is plain that, if pleasure is the sole good, provided the quantity be equally great, an equally desirable result will have been obtained whether it be enjoyed by many or by few, or even if it be enjoyed by nobody. It is plain that, if we ought to aim at the greatest happiness of the greatest number, this can only, on the hedonistic principle, be because the existence of pleasure in a great number of persons seems to be the best <em>means</em> available for attaining the existence of the greatest quantity of pleasure. This may actually be the case; but it is fair to suspect that Utilitarians have been influenced, in their adoption of the hedonistic principle, by this failure to distinguish clearly between pleasure or consciousness of pleasure and its possession by a person. It is far easier to regard the possession of pleasure by a number of persons as the sole good, than so to regard the mere existence of an equally great quantity of pleasure. If, indeed, we were to take the Utilitarian principle strictly, and to assume them to mean that the possession of pleasure by many persons was good in itself, the principle is not hedonistic: it includes as a necessary part of the ultimate end, the existence of a number of persons, and this will include very much more than mere pleasure.</p>
				<p>Utilitarianism, however, as commonly held, must be understood to maintain that either mere consciousness of pleasure, or consciousness of pleasure together with the minimum adjunct which may be meant by the existence of such consciousness in at least one <em>person</em>, is the <em>sole good</em>. This is its significance as an ethical doctrine; and as such it has already been refuted in my refutation of Hedonism. The most that can be said for it is that it does not seriously mislead in its practical conclusions, on the ground that, as an empirical fact, the method of acting which brings most good on the whole does also bring most pleasure. Utilitarians do indeed generally devote most of their arguments to showing that the course of action which will bring most pleasure is in general such as common sense would approve. We have seen that <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Sidgwick appeals to this fact as tending to show that pleasure is the sole good; and we have also seen that it does not tend to show this. We have seen how very flimsy the other arguments advanced for this proposition are; and that, if it be fairly considered by itself, it appears to be quite ridiculous. And, moreover, that the actions which produce most good on the whole do also produce most pleasure is extremely doubtful. The arguments tending to show it are all more or less vitiated by the assumption that what appear to be necessary conditions for the attainment of most pleasure in the near future, will always continue so to be. And, even with this vicious assumption, they only succeed in making out a highly problematical case. How, therefore, this fact is to be explained, if it be a fact, need not concern us. It is sufficient to have shown that many complex states of mind are much more valuable than the pleasure they contain. If this be so, <em>no form of Hedonism can be true</em>. And, since the practical guidance afforded by pleasure as a <em>criterion</em> is small in proportion as the calculation attempts to be accurate, we can well afford to await further investigation, before adopting a guide, whose utility is very doubtful and whose trustworthiness we have grave reason to suspect.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-3-65">
				<p><span epub:type="ordinal">65</span>. The most important points which I have endeavoured to establish in this chapter are as follows. (1) Hedonism must be strictly defined as the doctrine that “Pleasure is the only thing which is good in itself”: this view seems to owe its prevalence mainly to the naturalistic fallacy, and Mill’s arguments may be taken as a type of those which are fallacious in this respect; Sidgwick alone has defended it without committing this fallacy, and its final refutation must therefore point out the errors in his arguments (36⁠–⁠38). (2) Mill’s “Utilitarianism” is criticised: it being shown (<i>a</i>) that he commits the naturalistic fallacy in identifying “desirable” with “desired”; (<i>b</i>) that pleasure is not the only object of desire. The common arguments for Hedonism seem to rest on these two errors (39⁠–⁠44). (3) Hedonism is considered as an “Intuition,” and it is pointed out (<i>a</i>) that Mill’s allowance that some pleasures are inferior in quality to others implies both that it is an Intuition and that it is a false one (46⁠–⁠48); (<i>b</i>) that Sidgwick fails to distinguish “pleasure” from “consciousness of pleasure,” and that it is absurd to regard the former, at all events, as the sole good (49⁠–⁠52); (<i>c</i>) that it seems equally absurd to regard “consciousness of pleasure” as the sole good, since, if it were so, a world in which nothing else existed might be absolutely perfect: Sidgwick fails to put to himself this question, which is the only clear and decisive one (53⁠–⁠57). (4) What are commonly considered to be the two main types of Hedonism, namely, Egoism and Utilitarianism, are not only different from, but strictly contradictory of, one another; since the former asserts “My own greatest pleasure is the <em>sole</em> good,” the latter “The greatest pleasure of all is the <em>sole</em> good.” Egoism seems to owe its plausibility partly to the failure to observe this contradiction⁠—a failure which is exemplified by Sidgwick; partly to a confusion of Egoism as doctrine of end, with the same as doctrine of means. If Hedonism is true, Egoism cannot be so; still less can it be so, if Hedonism is false. The end of Utilitarianism, on the other hand, would, if Hedonism were true, be, not indeed the best conceivable, but the best possible for us to promote; but it is refuted by the refutation of Hedonism (58⁠–⁠64).</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
